<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//RED HAT//DTD MDITA 2.0 Task//EN" "mditaTask.dtd">
<task id="test-task">
  <title>MDITA Task Validation Test</title>
  <shortdesc>Exercises all elements permitted in the MDITA task shell:
    prereq, context, steps with substeps and choices, steps-unordered,
    result, tasktroubleshooting, postreq, notes, and profiling.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <audience type="administrator"/>
      <category>Installation</category>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>installation</keyword>
        <keyword>task</keyword>
      </keywords>
    </metadata>
    <data name="author" value="Validation Suite"/>
  </prolog>
  <taskbody>

    <!-- ========== PREREQ ========== -->
    <prereq>
      <p>Before you begin, ensure the following prerequisites are met:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>A running <keyword keyref="product-name"/> cluster (version 4.14+).</li>
        <li>The <cmdname>oc</cmdname> CLI installed and configured.</li>
        <li>Administrator access to the <codeph>openshift-config</codeph> namespace.</li>
      </ul>
      <note type="important">Back up your <filepath>kubeconfig</filepath>
        before proceeding.</note>
      <simpletable>
        <sthead>
          <stentry>Requirement</stentry>
          <stentry>Minimum</stentry>
        </sthead>
        <strow>
          <stentry>CPU</stentry>
          <stentry>4 cores</stentry>
        </strow>
        <strow>
          <stentry>Memory</stentry>
          <stentry>16 GB</stentry>
        </strow>
        <strow>
          <stentry>Disk</stentry>
          <stentry>100 GB</stentry>
        </strow>
      </simpletable>
    </prereq>

    <!-- ========== CONTEXT ========== -->
    <context>
      <p>This procedure installs and configures the monitoring stack on
        <keyword keyref="product-name"/>. The monitoring stack collects
        metrics from cluster components and user workloads.</p>
      <p>For details, see <cite>Monitoring Guide</cite> or the
        <xref href="https://docs.openshift.com/monitoring" format="html"
              scope="external">upstream documentation</xref>.</p>
      <dl>
        <dlentry>
          <dt>Prometheus</dt>
          <dd>Time-series database for metrics.</dd>
        </dlentry>
        <dlentry>
          <dt>Alertmanager</dt>
          <dd>Handles alerts from Prometheus.</dd>
        </dlentry>
      </dl>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-yaml">apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: cluster-monitoring-config
  namespace: openshift-monitoring
data:
  config.yaml: |
    enableUserWorkload: true</codeblock>
    </context>

    <!-- ========== ADDITIONAL SECTION BEFORE STEPS ========== -->
    <section platform="aws">
      <title>AWS-specific considerations</title>
      <p>On AWS, ensure that the <codeph>ebs-csi-driver</codeph> is installed
        for persistent storage.</p>
    </section>

    <!-- ========== STEPS ========== -->
    <steps>
      <!-- Step 1: simple cmd + info -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Log in to the cluster as an administrator.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-bash">oc login -u kubeadmin https://api.cluster.example.com:6443</codeblock>
          <note type="tip">Use <userinput>oc whoami</userinput> to verify
            your identity.</note>
        </info>
      </step>

      <!-- Step 2: cmd + substeps with notes and info -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Create the monitoring configuration.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>The configuration file controls which components are enabled.</p>
        </info>
        <substeps>
          <substep>
            <note type="important">Do not modify the
              <filepath>cluster-monitoring-config</filepath> ConfigMap
              while Prometheus is restarting.</note>
            <cmd>Create the ConfigMap in the
              <codeph>openshift-monitoring</codeph> namespace.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock outputclass="language-bash">oc apply -f monitoring-config.yaml</codeblock>
            </info>
          </substep>
          <substep>
            <cmd>Verify the ConfigMap was created.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock outputclass="language-bash">oc get configmap cluster-monitoring-config -n openshift-monitoring -o yaml</codeblock>
              <p>Expected output includes <systemoutput>enableUserWorkload: true</systemoutput>.</p>
            </info>
          </substep>
          <substep>
            <cmd>Wait for the Prometheus pods to restart.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock outputclass="language-bash">oc rollout status statefulset/prometheus-k8s -n openshift-monitoring</codeblock>
            </info>
          </substep>
        </substeps>
      </step>

      <!-- Step 3: cmd + choices -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Choose a storage backend for metrics retention.</cmd>
        <choices>
          <choice>Use ephemeral storage (default, no persistence across restarts).</choice>
          <choice>Use a <codeph>PersistentVolumeClaim</codeph> for durable storage.</choice>
          <choice>Use an external <codeph>Thanos</codeph> object store.</choice>
        </choices>
      </step>

      <!-- Step 4: note before cmd -->
      <step>
        <note type="caution">This step modifies cluster-wide alerting rules.
          Coordinate with your operations team.</note>
        <cmd>Configure alerting rules.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Create a <codeph>PrometheusRule</codeph> resource:</p>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-yaml">apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: PrometheusRule
metadata:
  name: custom-alerts
  namespace: openshift-user-workload-monitoring
spec:
  groups:
    - name: pod-alerts
      rules:
        - alert: PodCrashLooping
          expr: rate(kube_pod_container_status_restarts_total[15m]) > 0
          for: 1h</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <!-- Step 5: step with inline elements in cmd -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Open the <uicontrol>Monitoring</uicontrol> page in the
          <wintitle>OpenShift Web Console</wintitle> and navigate to
          <menucascade><uicontrol>Observe</uicontrol><uicontrol>Metrics</uicontrol></menucascade>.</cmd>
      </step>

      <!-- Step 6: profiling on step -->
      <step platform="azure">
        <cmd>For Azure clusters, configure the managed identity for
          Thanos access.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Set <varname>$AZURE_CLIENT_ID</varname> and
            <varname>$AZURE_TENANT_ID</varname>.</p>
        </info>
      </step>
    </steps>

    <!-- ========== RESULT ========== -->
    <result>
      <p>The monitoring stack is installed and collecting metrics.</p>
      <p>Verify by running:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-bash">oc get pods -n openshift-monitoring</codeblock>
      <p>All pods should show <systemoutput>Running</systemoutput> status.</p>
      <simpletable>
        <sthead>
          <stentry>Component</stentry>
          <stentry>Expected pods</stentry>
        </sthead>
        <strow>
          <stentry>Prometheus</stentry>
          <stentry>2</stentry>
        </strow>
        <strow>
          <stentry>Alertmanager</stentry>
          <stentry>3</stentry>
        </strow>
        <strow>
          <stentry>Thanos Querier</stentry>
          <stentry>2</stentry>
        </strow>
      </simpletable>
      <note>It may take up to 5 minutes for all pods to reach a running state.</note>
    </result>

    <!-- ========== TASKTROUBLESHOOTING ========== -->
    <tasktroubleshooting>
      <p>If monitoring pods are not starting:</p>
      <ol>
        <li>Check events: <userinput>oc get events -n openshift-monitoring --sort-by='.lastTimestamp'</userinput></li>
        <li>Check pod logs: <userinput>oc logs -n openshift-monitoring prometheus-k8s-0</userinput></li>
        <li>Verify the ConfigMap: <userinput>oc get cm cluster-monitoring-config -n openshift-monitoring -o yaml</userinput></li>
      </ol>
      <note type="tip">Error <msgph>OOMKilled</msgph> indicates insufficient
        memory. Increase the node memory or reduce retention period.</note>
    </tasktroubleshooting>

    <!-- ========== POSTREQ ========== -->
    <postreq>
      <p>After the monitoring stack is running:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Configure <xref href="test_concept.dita">alerting channels</xref>.</li>
        <li>Set up Grafana dashboards for visualization.</li>
        <li>Review <filepath>/etc/prometheus/rules</filepath> for default alert rules.</li>
      </ul>
    </postreq>

  </taskbody>
</task>
